>> Hi, and welcome to Dode Hardening Techniques.
I'm Drew Yao, and I'm a Security
Engineer with the Product Security team.
My co-presenter is Jacques Vidrine.
He's a Security Ninja with the OS Security team.
In this talk, I'm going to give an introduction
to product security and to some of our processes.
I'm also going to talk about securing code and
that means both finding and fixing security bugs.
And then Jacques is going to describe some of
the new security features in Leopard. Starting off
with Apple product security, we're responsible
for the security of all of Apple's products.
And as part of our mission, we do both
proactive and reactive efforts in order
to ensure this security. Now I'm going to just
describe the life cycle of an average security bug.
The new bugs are reported by a wide variety of
people, including Apple internal users and developers
and security researchers and security organizations.
We do...are responsible for the communication
with all these different kinds of people,
and we try to maintain a good relationship with them.
If you find a security bug, you can let us know about
it either via Radar or via product-security@apple.com.
And you may know Radar better as bugreport.apple.com.
We see all new security Radars, and we review them.
So if you file a Radar with the classification
security, you can be certain that we will see it
and we will handle it appropriately. Once a security bug
has been reported, we work to determine the root cause
and to search for any related issues, both
in the same project and in other projects.
We coordinate with the engineering team for the fix.
We don't actually implement the fix, but we
kind of try to verify that the fix is complete
and it really addresses the root cause. As this is going on,
we're constantly in contact with the reporter of the issue.
We're giving them status reports upon request, and
we notify them right before the fix goes out so
that we can coordinate an advisory with them.
Once the fix is ready, we test it.
It gets released, and we post the advisory.
The things that I've talked about
so far were all response measures,
things that we do once...when someone
else reports an issue to us.
But we also do a lot of proactive measures, things
that either prevent the creation of new bugs
or also trying to find existing security bugs.
One of the things that we do is training.
We do a lot of presentations just
like this but to Apple employees.
We also do a lot of one-on-one consultation
with various engineering teams to do things
like code audits, design reviews and so on.
We work to analyze new features, doing a threat analysis;
and we do...we work to harden existing software.
Another thing we do is what we call red team activities.
This just means trying to find security bugs
through either testing or code auditing.
And as part of our red team activities, we
develop and maintain and promote the use of tools;
and these include fuzzing and static code analysis tools.
And I'll describe these more later. Now
moving on to securing code.
I'm going to give an overview of the most common
security vulnerabilities and give some tips
on finding them, both by code inspection and by fuzzing.
Before I go any further, I'd like to just
mention the Apple Secure Coding Guide.
You can...you can find this just be Googling
Apple Secure Coding, and it covers a lot of stuff
that I'm not going to cover in this talk.
Some of the bullets are...are below.
And so I recommend it. One of the leading
causes of security issues is buffer overflows.
This, in case you don't know, it just means writing
past the end of the memory where you're supposed
to be writing and then smashing into other memory.
This can often lead to arbitrary code execution.
And I won't talk right now about how exactly that
works because it's been covered in many other places;
but just in order to find these issues, one of
the common things that you can look for is any use
of an unbounded copy API such as strcpy. In this...in
this call, if bad source is longer than the...the amount
of memory allocated for dest, an overflow will result.
And the fix for it is pretty simple.
You just switch to using a bounded copy API
like strlcpy, and the bound or the amount
to copy should be somehow related to the size of the
destination. Another common cause of buffer overflows is
when you do use a bounded copy, but the bound
or the amount of copy is not really validated.
It might be coming directly from the user or just
being influenced by the user or the attacker.
So in this case, what you can do is just do some kind
of bounds check that makes sure that it's not bigger
than the size of the destination. Another common
cause of security issues is integer overflows.
In this first block, we have a call to
malloc to try and allocate a certain size;
and if the attacker controls this bad_
num, it could be a very large number.
If we have a 32-bit program, then the size T or the
amount to malloc would be at most 2 to the 32 minus 1.
So if the product or the sum is
greater than 2 to the 32 minus 1,
then the high bits will be...will be just
discarded and only the low 32 bits will be left.
So it could be a very small number that actually
gets allocated, and that could often lead
to a heat buffer overflow later. A
related issue is integer underflows.
And this is when instead of something being unexpectedly
small, it's something becomes unexpectedly large.
This call to strncat is actually correct; but if the
dest_size is able to be influenced by the attacker at all,
maybe he could legitimately set it to be zero.
And so if we look at a third argument, zero
minus zero minus 1 would be negative 1.
And since strncat takes a size T as the third argument,
that's unsigned, the negative 1 will be interpreted
as a very large unsigned number leading to a buffer
overflow. And there are many ways to detect and handle these,
but we introduced one way that's new in Leopard.
And that's the checkint API.
You can read about this in checkint.h and it also has
man pages, and there are a lot of different flavors
of this checkint API for all the different
kinds of integer arithmetic that one can do.
So, for example, when you...in this sample code, we
want to check if bad_num plus padding could overflow.
And we're assuming that both of
them are unsigned 32-bit integers.
We can just call check_uint32_add on bad_num and
padding and pass the point there to result variable.
And if after the call, the result variable has
the overflow bit set, we know an overflow happened
and we can handle it however it's appropriate.
And if that didn't happen, then we know
that the overflow didn't happen in this size
which was returned is a safe number to allocate.
It didn't overflow. A related cause of
security issues is signedness issues.
And so in this example, we have this
bad_len which is a signed integer.
And we also have a check here that's trying
to do a bounds check to prevent the copy
if the bad_len is bigger than the size of the destination.
But if bad_len is under the control of the attacker or can
be influenced by the attacker, maybe it can be negative.
If it's negative, this check will always return false
because a negative number is always less than 100.
So when we get to the memcpy, it's
going to be...it's going to be interpreted
as a very large unsigned number leading to a buffer
overflow. And the fix for this is pretty simple.
Just whenever you have something that's being used
as, like, a length or a size or something like that,
that would really never legitimately be negative.
It's a good practice just to make it unsigned by default.
And in general, integers should be
unsigned by default unless you have a reason
that it would ever be negative. The
last common cause of security issues
that I'm going to talk about is format string bugs.
In this first block, we have three calls to
varying APIs where the parameter in red is
like a string that's being passed
directly as the format string parameter.
And when this happens, if an attacker controls the string
at all, he can set it to be like %s or %n
or to have these kind of format tokens inside it.
And this can lead to code execution
or other security problems
So the fix is actually very simple.
It's to make sure that the format parameter is a static
or fixed constant string; and then if you want to, say,
print out a string, you just make sure that
you have a %s token and then follow it
with a string. So most people are probably not familiar
with how exactly format strings can be exploited.
So I have a sample program here.
What it does is it has a stacked buffer called buff
and it copies the first argument to the program
into buff and then it calls printf on the buff.
And that's an incorrect call to
printf. So what can we do with that?
One thing we can do is try and put in a bunch
of %x characters in the format string.
And how these format string functions work is they look for
each of these format tokens like %x and for each one,
it'll go on the stack looking for an argument and convert
it to a hexadecimal number and print out that number.
With this call to printf, I didn't pass any arguments.
So it's just going to get whatever happened
to be on the stack and print that out.
And especially, you can notice
here at the end, this 41414141.
This, in case you don't know, hex 41 is
the ASCII code for capital A. So actually,
this comes from the user supplied format string
because it's stored on the stack. So at this point,
we've just...we've just determined that
an attacker can cause some arbitrary stuff
to be printed out which is no big deal.
But there is another thing we can do which
is instead of for the last %x,
I can put in a %n. How %n works is that it
takes the number of characters that would have been printed
so far and it writes that number to a pointer.
So when I ran this program, I saw that it
crashed trying to write to the pointer 41414141.
Since this is under my control, I
can write to any pointer I want.
But in order to get code execution, it would
also be very useful if I could control the value
that gets written to this arbitrary address.
And that's what this %100000x is for.
What this says is at a minimum print 100,000 characters.
If you remember, the %n token, what
it does is it takes the number of characters
that have been printed so far and writes them.
So this is exactly what I need in order
to control the value that gets written.
And, in fact, we see that when I disassemble the instruction
that caused the crash, this is a store instruction
which is writing the value that's
in register 24 to some memor$y.
And when I inspect register 24,
we see it's approximately 100,000.
So I can basically control the value that gets
written and the address that it gets written to.
And you can do multiple writes using multiple
%n tokens. So it should be clear
that code execution can be possible.
You can write whatever you want to wherever you want.
And these are a very dangerous issue but also very simple
to fix, as I described earlier. To review all these things
that I've talked about, some things that you can
look for when doing a code audit include looking
for unbounded copy APIs being used like strcpy, sprintf
or a loop where the loop termination case doesn't...doesn't
involve the size of the destination at all.
And the solution to these is just to switch over to
using the bounded version of these APIs, like strlcpy.
Another thing to look for is integer arithmetic
being done on the amount to be allocated or copied.
And this can often lead to integer
overflows and integer underflows.
And you can use the checkint API which is new
in Leopard to try to detect these. Oops, going back.
Another thing to look for is anything that's...that
represents a length or a size that is signed.
It probably should be unsigned just to avoid this problem
where when it's negative it can bypass
some bounds checks. Format string issues
which I just went over, it's very simple to look for them.
You just look for when the format string parameter
is not a fixed constant string. Now all these things
that I've described so far are bad things that can
happen if some malicious input is passed to them.
So, for example, strcpy is usually only if it's
possible for the attacker to pass a bad...or
to control the string that gets passed as the source buffer.
So another way to look at it, to look for code bugs is
instead of looking at these bad things that can happen is
to use a more top down approach instead which is to look
at where data comes into the program and try and follow it
through the program, watch as it gets propagated and see
where it gets used in dangerous ways. But both the top down
and the bottom up approach can sometimes be
difficult or not always entirely easy to do.
Let me give an example.
Let's say we have a function called foo and foo reads
into a header structure from some file or from some socket
which is probably untrusted and it
also mallocs a fixed size buffer.
And at this point, we don't know that
any security issues has happened.
And it passes these two parameters to bar, bar
passes them to baz and baz passes then to xyzzy.
At this point, xyzzy reads into the buffer
using hdr.len as the amount to copy.
Now you'll remember that header came from the untrusted file
or socket or whatever, so hdr.len could be arbitrary.
It could be very large.
And we also know that buff is a fixed size buffer.
So it's pretty much certain that a buffer overflow can
result here. So you'll remember that when we looked at foo,
we didn't know that any security issue had happened.
You'll also remember that when we looked
at xyzzy...if we look at xyzzy alone,
we also don't know that any security issue's happened.
This is because we don't know the size of the buffer and
we don't know that header came from an untrusted source.
So the only way that we could really understand that this is
a security issue is if we understand the entire call graph.
Now in real-life programs, often the call
graph is much more complicated than this.
So it can be quite complex to try and
do this, and it can also be error prone.
One potential solution to this problem
is to use static code analysis tools.
There are a number of commerical tools that are available.
And basically, what they do is they try to do the same kind
of things that a manual auditor would do which is to look
at where data comes into the program, to follow it
as it gets propagated through the program and to see
where it gets used in any dangerous ways.
So these are very useful tools, but they do
have some drawbacks including false positives.
This just means that when you...when it returns
some kind of bug that it thinks is an error,
sometimes it's really a bug, sometimes it's not.
And if it's not, then it's sort of wasted a little bit
of your time trying to figure out if it was real or not.
And also because static code analysis tools look at source
code, if you don't have source code, then it doesn't apply.
So there's a complementary method of finding
security bugs using tools, and that is fuzzing.
Fuzzing is automated robustness testing, and this
means sending malformed data to a running application.
And by malformed, I mean good enough so that it appears
valid but also bad enough that it might break stuff.
And I'll talk more later about how to generate
malformed data. But first let me talk a little bit more
about the motivation for fuzzing.
Fuzzing is a primary tool for hackers, and this is in large
part because it doesn't require access to source code.
People outside of the company usually
wouldn't have access to source code.
So this is the kind of thing that they would have to try.
They can't do code audit or static code analysis
tools. It tends to find exploitable flaws,
meaning when you run...when you just feed that
input to a program, it either crashes or it doesn't.
There's no false positives.
If it crashes, that's at least a denial of service and
potentially something worse. They're relatively easy
to create and run, and they test assumptions in the code.
And they determine or demonstrate
the importance of defensive coding.
A lot of programmers code something
so...just so it's functional.
For example, if they're coding an image processing program,
they'll have suite of valid images and they'll say okay,
once my program can display all these images, I'm done.
But if they don't take into account that deliberately
malformed image can cause security issues,
then they're in for some...in for some headaches. And
attackers are actively fuzzing commercial products.
We know this is true for Apple products,
and it may be true for yours as well.
To drive this point home a little more thoroughly, you may
remember the month of Apple bugs which was this January.
In this month, once every day some security researchers
released a security bug publicly in some Mac products.
Of the 23 issues that were reported against Apple
products, 15 of them were most likely found by fuzzing.
And I say most likely because I don't
know for sure how they found them.
But given what we know, it's seems very likely
The remaining seven issues were reported against third-party
Mac products, and of these six were most likely found
by fuzzing. Now that we have the motivation
out of the way, what can we fuzz?
We can fuzz any program that takes untrusted input,
and this includes especially programs
that speak any network protocol.
For example, Safari and Apache both speak HTTP.
Anything that parses untrusted files, for example,
QuickTime parses a lot of different kinds of media files.
And setuid programs because they take
a lot of untrusted input from the user.
It's untrusted because the program runs with the
privileges of a different user. So once you are ready
to do your fuzzing, one of the common ways of doing
fuzzing is to take a valid template and try and mutate it.
For example, if you're attacking a file format,
you would take a valid file and mutate it.
If you're attacking a network protocol, you would
take a valid session transcript and try to mutate it.
So a very good target within these templates to go
for is any kind of size or length or count field,
and this is because these values are often used
as the amount to either allocate or to copy.
As we saw in the earlier section, the number
that's being used as the amount to allocate
or copy can often cause integer overflows, underflows
and buffer overflows when it's used as the amount
to copy. So what are some good values that
we can try to fill in in these fields?
One good thing to try is anywhere
near signed or unsigned boundaries,
and this is because it can trigger the
signedness issues that I mentioned earlier.
Another good thing to try is powers
of 2 plus or minus a small offset.
This is because programmers often allocate around
powers of 2, like 256 or 512, things like that.
So if you use this kind of value,
plus or minus a small offset,
sometimes you can trigger off by one or off by a few errors.
Also with certain values of powers of 2, you can
trigger integer overflows or underflows by addition
or subtraction. Finally, good things
to try are...include using, like,
the biggest possible number divided
by some other number and then add one.
And this is try and trigger integer
overflows by a multiplication.
For example, SIZE_T_MAX divided by 2 plus 1 times 2 is going
to be something that's slightly larger than 2 to the 32.
So mod 2 to the 32 is going to2 be some small number.
And if that's used as the amount to allocate,
it's going to cause potentially a buffer overflow
later. With string fields, one of the common things
that you can try is just to take a
character and repeat it over and over.
The point of this is to try and expose the
use of unbounded copy APIs like strcpy.
And the reason you use the same character over and over is
because you might want to...like, when you get a crash log,
it's pretty common if there was buffer overflow that you'll
see this character repeated over and over in the crash log,
either in the registers or in the stack or otherwise.
And the reason you try different lengths
is because obviously, if it was too short,
then sometimes it won't cause the overflow
because the buffer won't be big enough.
If you try it too long, sometimes there are partial
filters in place or incorrect bounds checks in place.
So maybe, for example, the 65535 As would not 5trigger the
overflow because they would be caught by the partial filter.
But the 10,000 would trigger the overflow.
Another good thing to try would be these format tokens.
They...if there's a format string
bug, they'll cause a crash.
And binary data, when you're just
working with a text application.
This might be because the application does
some kind of arithmetic on the character values
or it might just be because it's unexpected.
And fuzzing is about really just trying to
put in unexpected things and see what happens.
And especially,null bytes are useful to
try because CStrings are null terminated.
So terminating a string unexpectedly early can sometimes
cause issues. And if you know a little bit about the format
that you're fuzzing, any kind of
delimiter is a really good thing to try.
And this is because delimiters
are used as control information.
So, for example, with HTML and
XML, we have these angle brackets.
You can try to either add them or
removed them from the valid stream.
So, for example, this valid HTML
becomes this slightly invalid HTML.
And if the parser is not robust, it might get confused
and bad things might happen. With binary streams,
like binary files or binary network protocols, often
it's kind of too much work to be very format aware.
It's too much work to figure out that this
part is a length field, this part is a string,
this part might be a time stamp or something like that.
So there's a very surprisingly effective alternative
which is just to randomly flip some bits in the stream
in a window. And let me give a more concrete example of that.
Let's say you want to find a security bug in
a program that parses MP3 files like iTunes.
What you could do is take a valid
MP3 file and make a copy of it
and just mutuate the copy in a certain field in the file.
And by mutate, I just mean flip some of the bits randomly.
You can then save out this mutated copy, go back to the
original, make another copy and again mutate the copy
but this time the window or the field
of mutation has shifted and then so on.
You keep sliding the window across the
file, saving out these mutated files.
The reason we do this sliding window is that we
want to get as much code coverage as possible.
Theoretically, at least, different parts of
the code parse different parts of the file.
So with each of these files, most of it is
valid; but only a small part is malformed.
Therefore, just the part of the code that parses that part
of the file is going get exercised more. Now once
you have created all these mutated test cases,
you would then run them against your application.
And there are a list of things that you would
probably want to look out for and try to log.
The main one, I would say, is crashes.
You probably want to, say, try to detect a crash
after running each case; and if the crash gets caused,
then you log that this test case caused this crash.
Another common thing that gets caused is hangs
Depending on if you care or not about
hangs, you can do different things.
If you don't care, you can just kill the
application every time after every test case.
If you do care, then you can try to detect
it and then kill it. Rarely, very infrequently
but sometimes, you can cause a kernel panic.
I just wanted to note if you do cause a kernel
panic, we'd really like to know about it.
So please report it. But if you cause a kernel
panic, you can't really detect it afterwards
because your system is in a halted state.
So what you can do is if you think a kernel panic
is likely, you can...before you run each test case,
you can write to a log saying I'm about to run case
number N. And if you do get a panic, you can just reboot,
look at the file, and you're pretty sure that case N is
the one that caused the panic. But fuzzing is not a panacea.
It's not perfect.
There's some challenges when doing it.
One of them is finding or creating good seeds to mutate.
For example, if you're fuzzing MP4
files, MP4 is a container format.
It can contain all different kinds of audio and
video codecs and bit rates and all this stuff.
If you want to get good code coverage, you would have to
generate or find a large suite of valid files to mutate.
And that can be quite a hassle. Another
challenge is determining
if a crash exposes a code execution bug
because not all crashes are exploitable.
And the reason you would do this is for triage.
Obviously, you would want to fix
these code execution bugs first.
And this is...this can be quite a challenge
because if you don't have security expertise,
trying to figure out to really declare
that I'm 100% sure
that this test case could never
be exploited can be a lot of work.
So for many people who don't necessarily have the security
expertise, it may just be easier to fix the crashes,
to just treat all of them like serious security bugs
because it's more effort to really diagnose them than it is
to just fix them. Another common challenge is duplicates.
It's quite common that if you run, say, 5,000 cases,
maybe 50 of them all caused the exact same
crash exposing the exact same bug in the code.
So figuring out which ones of these are
duplicates of each other can be a lot of effort.
One approach you can take to this is to...after you're done
you have all these crash logs, you can just do some kind
of text processing on them to figure out
which ones are duplicates and you can do this
with an automated script. Another common
challenge is nondeterministic crashes.
This means that for a given test case maybe
sometimes it crashes, sometimes it doesn't.
And this is often caused by heap buffer
overflows or heap corruption in general.
So, for example, depending on whatever happens to
be adjacent to your heap buffer, overriding it may
or may not cause a crash because maybe
it is used again later, maybe it's not.
Maybe there's a pointer there; maybe there isn't.
So one way to handle this is to use Guard Malloc
which you can read about in man libgmalloc.
What it does is it places malloc blocks
directly adjacent to an unmapped page.
So the moment you write past the end of your malloc block,
you'll immediately start writing into this unmapped page
and cause a crash right away thus removing
the randomness. Another common cause
of nondeterministic crashes is race conditions.
Sometimes all the stars just have to be
aligned just right in order to cause a crash.
So for these, there's not really a great way to handle it.
Sometimes you just have to get lucky that it caused the
crash, and then afterwards you can try to run the case over
and over and see if you can reproduce it.
A related issue is getting good
coverage across different environments.
It's not uncommon that, say, if you have a computer
over here that has certain software installed
or certain configuration, that the test
case will cause a crash on this one
but doesn't cause a crash on that computer.
So...and especially in this vein, one
thing to watch out for is architecture.
It's not uncommon again that, say, PBC versus Intel or
64-bit versus 32-bit, it'll crash on one but not on another.
So in order to get code coverage or just good coverage,
you have to try running your testing
across different environments.
In summary, fuzzing is an automated
robustness testing technique.
It's a primary tool for hackers.
It's relatively cheap and easy to implement and to
use, and it's good to incorporate into the QA process.
And by doing this, you're using the same kind
of techniques that outside attackers use.
So you're likely to find the same bugs; and then when you
fix them ahead of time, you can just save yourself a lot
of headaches. I'd also like to mention that
fuzzing is not entirely just for security.
By increasing the robustness of your code, you also increase
or improve your user experience because these malformed
or unexpected inputs don't always come from an attacker.
Sometimes they just come from people doing crazy stuff.
So when that happens, you'd much rather have, like,
just some warning message pop up than to have a crash. So
that about wraps it up for me, and now I'd
like to pass it off to my co-presenter Jacques.
>> Thanks, Drew. Now Drew covered a lot of techniques
that could be used to avoid introducing flaws
in your software applications or
to find them and eliminate them.
But I think as we all know, for any non-trivial piece
of software, if...even if you have the most disciplined
and best educated team, every now
and then a bug does get through.
So a strategy based on, just doing
it all right the first time
or eliminating all the bugs before somebody
else finds them is kind of incomplete.
And we recognize that, and we want to help out.
So Leopard provides several security improvements that can
mitigate a vulnerabiity should one slip by. I'm going to talk
about half a dozen different technologies
that can mitigate a vulnerability.
That is, even if that bug is present in a piece of
code, it can either make it very difficult to exploit
or it can reduce the impact of that if it is successfully
supported...exploited. The first thing I'm going to talk
about has to do with a subtle issue
in modern user interfaces.
And that's that the gesture to open a document is
the same as the gesture to launch an application.
The problem with that is that malicious software
or malware can be disguised as a document.
For example, you may have seen in the news
last year that on the Mac rumors site,
somebody posted a Trojan called...that
was later called Leap A. But they said oh,
here's some Leopard screen shots for you.
And as it turns out, after downloading
it, it wasn't screenshots at all.
It was actually a malicious piece of software.
Now casual inspection of that might not be enough.
If you just look at it, it looks good.
It looks like a JPEG.
It has a JPEG icon.
I might as well click it and see what it has in there.
If you look very carefully, you can see
that it is instead an executable file.
And in this case, turns out to
be a piece of malicious software.
So it's kind of unreasonable, I think, to expect
every user every time they download every item
to do this kind of close inspection.
In fact, sometimes I've heard some security people say to
others you know, you should never open e-mail attachments.
That's dangerous.
Well, it can be dangerous.
But to most users, they're thinking well, what do we
have e-mail attachments for if I can't even open them.
This is a problem we're trying
to solve. So with file quarantine,
a new feature in Leopard, it's pretty straightforward.
When content is downloaded, the downloading
application marks it with some quarantine properties.
And after that point, we say that item
is quarantined, much like the Department
of Agriculture might quarantine a cow before
they know if it has mad cow disease or something.
Later when you go to click on that, you want to
open it, when Leopard sees that it's quarantined,
it performs some additional inspection and that
might involve checking the type of the document
or checking if there's user overrides or whatever.
But if it turns out to be a safe document,
an actual document not an application,
the quarantine state's silently removed
and everything just keeps on flowing.
The user's work flow hasn't been interrupted.
But if it instead turns out to be an application, the
user's presented with the context of his download.
He can see when it was downloaded
and where it was downloaded from.
Notice here in this dialogue, we
even have a show web page button.
So the user, if he doesn't remember
because he downloaded it two weeks ago,
what this was about can actually press this
button and be brought back to the web page
where the download originated. Something
happens similar for Mail.
If this had been from a Mail message, it would say show
message; and that would bring up the piece of e-mail
that the item was previously attached to.
Now this wouldn't be very effective if after having
something in quarantine moving that item around
or copying it or archiving it would cause
the quarantine properties to disappear.
So locked pieces of Leopard actually
propagate these properties.
Let me show you an example.
An initial download of a disk image, say, the
downloading application puts the quarantine properties
on the disk image.
Later we
mount that disk image with the disk image's framework,
is it doing the work behind the scenes?
Maybe we look inside.
We see there's an archive, a zip archive.
Of course, you know, we're going to extract that.
Maybe copy it out to finder and open it up.
Finally, eventually, hopefully, we're going to stop running
into archives and run into some actual files we care about
and think great, we finally got
to the screenshots, let's go.
Well, even after all that manipulation, we still
have that download context available for the user.
So we don't lose that.
I think that's really important in order to make this work.
As I said, we've modified lots of Leopard in order
to make this possible like the disk images framework
and our archive utilities and things of that nature.
And, of course, we've modified our
network applications like Safari
and Mail to add the quarantine
properties in the first place.
So we'd like you guys applications
to do the same kinds of things.
And, of course, to do that you'll need an API.
The file quarantine API is straightforward.
I'm going to talk about it in two pieces.
The first is directly manipulating quarantine properties.
This is handled through a new launch
services named attribute.
What one does is create a dictionary with the pieces
of quarantined information that
needs to be stored with the item.
What type of download application it was,
the origin URL, things of that nature.
And then you can us LSSetItem
attribute to store that with that item.
So the information of what type of keys there
are and what their meaning are can be found
in the launch services headers, LSInfo and LSQuarantine.
The second part of the API is something
called automatic quarantine mode.
With this, you can start your application
in automatic quarantine mode
and every file that it creates will be quarantined.
It will have quarantine properties.
Now these properties won't be as rich as the ones that
you can get by sending them directly because, you know,
Leopard doesn't know whether an arbitrary
process is doing e-mail or chatting or what not.
And it doesn't know the origin for your file.
It doesn't know why you created that file.
But at least you have the minimum information such as the
time the file was created and what application created it
so the same mechanisms can work. I'll give a
quick example of how to use these two APIs.
The first is directly manipulating into properties.
There's two steps.
First you create a dictionary with
the pieces of quarantined information.
In this example, I started out putting the
origin URL and the type of application.
I've deleted the rest.
These slides get long quick.
The second step is to actually take that
dictionary and assign it to an item.
And, again, as I said, we used LSSetItemAttribute.
If you later wanted to observe what the
quarantine information is or even see
if a file has some quarantine information, say, because your
file management thing that copies files or archives files,
you can do that by using the LS copy item attribute
to get that same dictionary right back out.
Using automatic quarantine mode's even simpler.
You simply edit your info.plist and add
this one key, the LSFileQuarantineEnabled.
When that's in place, when the application's launched,
it will cause all files created to be quarantined.
You can optionally specify some path matching patterns
for files that you don't want to have quarantined.
Now that's not as useful as you might think.
It turns out that quarantining things that aren't
really downloads doesn't have any ill effects.
If you have an application that starts up and creates a
preferences file and it was running in quarantine mode,
that preferences file is going to get quarantined.
It sounds not right.
But it's actually quite rare for the user to navigate
through his library preferences directory and double click
on that thing to launch the property editor.
But it does happen.
In that case, it'll be examined.
It'll be seen that it's a regular document.
The quarantine will be cleared.
And, again, things just continue without
any interruption to the work flow.
So I'm not sure how much utility this has,
but it is there. Why if you have the ability
to directly set the quarantine properties and
especially supply more information would you want
to use the automatic quarantine mode?
I can think of a couple of reasons.
One is because you want to start using quarantine right now.
That's a fair reason.
That's a good reason.
But another can be illustrated by
how Safari is using quarantine today.
Safari actually runs in automatic quarantine mode.
So all the files that Safari creates are quarantined.
But it also uses the LSSetItemAttribute
API in order to specify more details
for those items that it knows are downloaded.
The automatic quarantine mode picks up the
slack, though, for something like plug-ins.
Safari doesn't have a knowledge
of what plug-ins might be doing.
Some of them might be doing downloads.
But it sure wants them to have
quarantine information associated with it.
So that picks up those other pieces.
Well, let's say those plug-ins evolve and start
setting quarantine information themselves.
That's still going to work out
because they're just going to override
that default automatically added quarantine information.
So this work is working pretty well in practice. The next
thing I'd like to talk about is the Leopard Sandbox.
In the security community, the Sandbox is a overloaded term.
For example, if the Java security
policy is often called the Java Sandbox.
In that case, the Sandbox is actually the mechanism
that's implementing and enforcing the security policy.
That's in contrast to the Leopard Sandbox
which is created to harden your application.
It's not a replacement or extension of the
usual operating system access controls.
Rather, it's a safety mechanism.
It's like a seat belt.
It's there for when things go wrong.
It hardens your application by letting you specify
what kinds of things your application is expected
to do, only the things that it needs to do.
And if it attempts to do other
things, it simply won't allow it.
And this works even with root processes with processes
that have full system privileges. So the result of this is
that for those applications, the impact
of the vulnerability is greatly reduced.
If an attacker manages to compromise an application
in a Sandbox, that's not great, you don't like that;
but it still limits what that attacker
can do with that compromise.
Because of this, many system services in
Leopard are now running in a Sandbox.
That includes things like BIND, the Internet name server,
little demons like portmap, the Xgrid infrastructure.
These are actually all running with quite conversative
Sandboxes where everything's denied by default
and we've attempted to give it only the privileges that
it needs to do its job. We also have Spotlight importers
and QuickLooks plug-ins running in Sandbox.
That Sandbox is a little more liberal.
It does provide a speed bump, though,
for an attacker by keeping importers
and plug-ins from being able to talk to the network.
So this means it can't accidentally or maliciously
phone home or upload data to a remote server.
So if you're writing an import or a plug-in, you
should keep that in mind. I wanted to give an example
of the Sandbox profile language, the configuration
language that's used to create Sandboxes.
Now for this release, this language is private interface.
It's a scheme-based configuration language.
And in this example...thanks, we're happy with
the flexibility from that...in this example,
this profile denies everything by default and adds
the ability to read system configuration variables
to do any kind of networking in this case.
But it also allows some files system access but quite
restricted, some reading, some writing, some creating;
but only to paths that match the regular
expressions that have been specified.
That gives you just a little taste of the kind
of power that's behind the scenes there. But
you may still want to use the Sandbox.
Even though this is private interface, we do
have a public interface which is really simple
and provides a few pre-defined Sandboxes.
Those are things like a pure computation profile which
basically restricts almost any operating system access.
At first it might seem weird.
How can you use that?
Well, one example that we've put to good use is to take a
multi-media codec and to run it in its own address space.
And then we have that codec also running in a Sandbox.
So its parent process with a user interface and
everything else can feed it data from whatever source,
the network, files, which might be malicious.
And well, codecs, image decoders, multi-media
decoders are...have...are notorious
for having things like integer overflows and whatnot.
But if one of these should be triggered, then
the attacker may have compromised that codec
but he doesn't really have any ability to do
anything else except maybe suck some of your CPU time
for a while. There's a second saving grace, too.
When you're doing streaming video, sometimes
there is corruption of the data stream.
Sometimes that unfortunately results in the codecs crashing.
If you're running it in a separate address
space, the codec crashes and goes away.
The user doesn't necessarily have to see that, especially if
you just restart the codec after you resync the data stream.
You get some pretty cool stability that way. We also
provide some read-only profiles which are meant for things
that are pure viewers like a PDF viewer
or a Word viewer, something like that.
And I mentioned earlier about the Spotlight
plug-in...Spotlight importers and the QuickLooks plug-ins.
They use a prohibit networking built-in profile.
As an example of how to use these, we have this snippet.
There's just one function call to make, sandbox_init
and you specify a constant that details
the Sandbox that you want to be put in.
When this function returns successfully,
you're in the Sandbox.
The process can't escape that Sandbox.
It can't enter another one.
That's it. Moving on, we have a
new automatic firewall in Leopard.
This has a new inbound filtering engine;
and unlike most of personal firewalls,
instead of doing packet-based filtering,
it filters based on application.
So no longer would one have to figure out
and select the port and protocol in order
to make an application work while still keeping a firewall.
In this case, I've selected iTunes and iChat, decided
I want those guys to be able to talk on the network.
In particular I want them to be able
to listen for incoming connections.
But I've chosen some different options for them.
For iChat, since I want to get video chats from anywhere,
I've just allowed the incoming connections from anywhere.
But for iTunes, I'm doing music sharing; but I don't
necessarily want the whole world to grab my music
so I've restricted it to local connections only.
That means connections from my locally connected
subnets. But you don't even have to go to system preferences.
We've come out with, I think, a great way to
have applications almost configure themselves.
So if your user wants to download
and run SubEthaEdit, you know,
I decided I'm going to do some collaborative editing today.
And I haven't run it before on this machine, we'll get
a dialogue that says hey, this thing needs to listen.
Do you want to let it or not?
If you choose...whatever you choose,
that choice is going to be recorded.
You're going to be asked the one time.
If I deny, it'll be stored as a deny for that application.
If I allow, it'll be stored as an allow.
That's a much easier configuration for most users.
They don't have to figure out why
didn't SubEthaEdit not work just now.
It told me I was going to be able to edit documents
across my network and stuff, but it didn't work.
I'm not sure why.
This way, they're totally in control of it.
They don't even have to visit the sys
configuration panel unless they want to,
unless they want to change their
decision later. Now IPFW is still present.
Got ahead of myself.
IPFW is still present for advanced users.
This is the IPFW packet filtering firewall
that we've had for several releases.
You can still configure it from the command line or
using the Mac OS X server user interface,
or maybe some of you guys are writing
some great applications for configuring
that firewall. Package signing has been added
to our PackageMaker and to our installer.
In PackageMaker, you can select
the field labeled certificate,
pick a certificate out of your Keychain
that's suitable for key signing.
And the package that will then be produced
will be signed with that certficate.
The installer, when using that, can detect any
modification that may have happened since it was signed.
If it does that, it'll fail to install
and warn the user what's happened.
This is a good complement to code signing
which is a slightly different beast.
Code signing provides several benefits.
One is that it detects malicious modification
to your code or unintentional ones.
But more importantly, it allows us to keep an
application's identity across versions and updates.
So that's pretty cool.
It knows that wonder app version 1 and wonder app version
2 are just two different instances of the same program.
Well, that's useful because other pieces of the
system, like the Keychain, can use that information.
So we'll expect you'll see far fewer of the Keychain
dialogues that tend to happen when Safari or Mail
or your application is updated and they
need to grab passwords from the Keychain.
We shouldn't have to prompt the user so
much saying hey, is that really Mail?
Do you really want me to give it your password?
Because we would have maintained a stable identity across
the updates. There's also several other pieces of Leopard
that use that identity when the code's signed.
I mentioned the Keychain already.
The automatic firewall that we just discussed
also uses that in order to configure itself.
Parental controls now uses the code signing so that when
you select that I'm going to let my kid use Safari or Mail,
it has that as a cryptographically signed
identity so it can allow that and only that.
It's much harder to spoof a, say,
World of Warcraft and call that Safari.
I stole that from Perry's talk yesterday.
It was a In-Depth Code Signing
thing. So authorization services
and several other pieces of the
infrastructure also use this.
All of the gory details are in the Code Signing Guide.
This will tell you how to sign your code and
what the ramifications are going to be of that.
All I know I should tell you is please go sign your code.
There's no ill effects to that.
It's still going to run on Tiger.
Of course, it's going to run on Leopard.
Tiger will ignore the signature.
But you'll be able to leverage several
benefits in Leopard as you have it today,
and we believe that we'll increasingly add more
benefits to that over time. Now some of you may have gone
to the compiler advances talk yesterday and
have seen a little bit of this material already,
but we're going to go in a little
more depth about what's going on.
The first piece is non-executable data.
It's also called...I think Intel calls it execute/disable.
Since Intel Tiger shipped, Mac OS X
stack has been marked non-executable.
The benefit of this is that it makes
certain buffer overflow attacks impossible.
When a buffer overflow occurs, a typical
attack would include delivering instructions
that the attacker wants your computer to execute, some
kind of a payload; and that would go into a stacked buffer.
It would also overwrite the return
address that's on the stack,
and that's how the attacker controls
the instruction pointer.
So we point that at his payload in the stack.
That's the classic buffer overflow.
But with a non-executable stack, that doesn't work.
When the attacker attemps to jump into the
stack, they'll get a memory protection fault.
Now there's still other places that
the attacker can put his payload.
There's the heap and static data segments.
But in Leopard, all 64-bit apps extend this protection.
So it covers the stack and the heap and other locations.
In fact, by default, the entire set
of memory regions in a 64-bit process
on a Leopard is either writeable or executable.
This is known as WXRX in some circles. So first a 64-bit app
that's running on a Intel Core 2 Duo or later or on a G5,
the memory layout might be something like this diagram
which simply illustrates several memory regions.
The green ones are the ones that
are writeable but can't be executed,
and the blue one is the one in
this diagram that can be executed.
But it's read only.
You can't write to it. By the way, 32-bit apps will
continue to remain compatible as they are on Tiger
by only providing the non-executable stack.
They won't get the extra protection.
This is just another reason to use 64-bit apps and deliver
them whenever possible. Now there are some applications
that actually do need to generate code, do need to write
some instructions to the data segment and then execute it.
Just in time filers might be an example.
So in order to do that you can
just use the unprotect system call
in order change the protection
on a particular memory region.
So all this non-executable data stuff really
makes it harder to pull off an exploit.
It's going to mitigate a lot of buffer overflows, format
string bugs and the other types of bugs we talked about.
But it's not perfect.
There's still ways to do an exploit.
For example, an attacker, even though
he can't write the payload he wants,
may find that there's a library already
loaded in memory that does just what he wants.
Let's use the standard C system function as an example.
The standard C system function takes one argument, a string,
and passes it to the shell and executes whatever it says.
That's pretty powerful.
So if an attacker can arrange that the return address
points to the system and provides on the stack a string
of the command he wants to run, then
he's successfully gained control
of your machine.This technique is commonly known
as "return-to-libc." Now a way to thwart this is
to introduce something called address
space layout randomization or ASLR.
A system without ASLR might look something like this.
Here we have libSystem.
That's our main kitchen sink...I mean, main
standard library with the AppKit, Core Services
and some other frameworks I've added here for illustration.
An attacker might be targeting that system
function we talked about in libSystem.
He can do that because he knows for all Macs with the same
operating system release and same architecture the location,
the memory location of that function is the same.
So he can jump into that memory
location and start executing.
As we see here, we start off with the prologue
of the function, saving the base pointer.
So this is going to work for him.
But the reason this works is because
the whole address space is predictable.
With ASLR, we load common operating system libraries
in a random order, starting from a random page
and put random gaps in between the libraries.
This makes it much harder.
The attacker now may still be aiming
for the libSystem system function,
but he's maybe using the same address as before.
He can't predict what the address is any longer.
So his exploit is going to wind up
jumping maybe into unmapped page
or maybe into the middle of some data segment in
Quartz Core. That's here.
He's not going to get the results that
he thinks. Now I...and I'm just kidding.
That crash...that crash is what's likely to result, but
that crash is a heck of a lot better than getting owned,
than letting that attacker have control of your machine.
So there's still some areas that are not randomized
by default, and those might have something
that the attacker can jump into in certain situations.
But if you compile your applications with something
called pie or position independent executable,
then that will cause your application's main
executable to be loaded at a random address as well
and all the dependent libraries that
aren't already in the shared cache.
So you should really do that.
Take advantage of that, again. Now this is really only
effective for remote attackers, for someone trying to break
into your web browser or into your network service.
I just felt I should mention that.
If you have a local attacker, they can pretty much
look for themselves and see where the functions are.
So if you have a malicious user on your
system, this doesn't protect you much.
But it's really great for those network facing
apps. We've got a couple of more options.
We have now stack overflow checking as
an option in our developer tool chain.
This uses a technique called Canaries that's been
implemented before by things like stack guard.
The word...the term Canary comes
from, of course, the miner's Canary.
The miner would go into a shaft; and the
danger there is methane gas, carbon monoxide.
Sometimes that leaks out and kills you.
So bring a Canary along which are
much more sensitive to the gases.
If the Canary dies, you know you better
get out now because the gas is coming.
So we do something similar here.
I'll show you how we use a Canary in stack protection.
On the right, we have a function, appropriately
named bad, that's not very well written.
There's a buffer overflow there.
There's a fixed size stack buffer, and
we're using sprintf on that stack buffer.
But we're supplying a couple of
parameters that could be unbounded.
So, of course, after the path buffer's been filled out,
the data will continue to overwrite the
return address and you knows what else there.
Of course, the key thing is that return address.
If the attacker can control that return address,
he can control what the application does
to a great degree. If you use the stack
protector, it inserts the Canary,
a random value, one that the attacker can't predict.
Now when the buffer overflow occurs, it'll overwrite the
Canary before it gets to the return address and may continue
and successfully overwrite the return address.
But the stack protector has added code.
When the function is about to return, it checks the Canary.
If the Canary is not the same value
it started with, then it's all over.
The application aborts.
Again, not the best thing; but better than being
owned. One last thing is object size checking.
This can change some unsafe API
usage into some checked behavior.
There's a list of them, mostly memory
movement and string manipulation functions.
You turn it on very...in a very straightforward fashion.
You just define four to five source to two.
No one asks about the two.
Just use the two.
To illustrate what this does, we have the same
bad function that we had on the previous slide.
I've called it before here, and
then what the compiler does to it.
So first, of course, we had that
sprintf on this fixed size buffer.
The compiler changes this into a call to a new function.
It's built-in sprintf check and includes something called
a builtin_object_size which tells...instructs the compiler
if you can at compile time how big
this thing is, pass that value here.
So...and not in all cases can it tell.
If you're doing dynamic memory allocation off the
heap, it's not going to be able to figure that out.
But if it's a buffer on...a fixed size buffer on the
stack or if it's a fixed size buffer in your data segment
or if it's part of a structure where you have
the full type definition for that, it can tell.
And in those cases, it will do the sprintf as usual.
But if it detects an overflow, that it's written more than
was in the buffer, then, again, we abort the process. So
in summary, today we noted that security really
requires both proactive and reactive measures.
Educate yourself on the different types
of security vulnerabilities that they are.
Certainly do as much testing as possible.
Hunt around for your own bugs.
But also be prepared.
It's important to have a good process in place for that day
that someone else outside your organization
does report a vulnerability to you.
You need to smoothly handle that and roll out an
update in a manner appropriate for that kind of a bug.
Fuzzing is one of the, I think, the
easiest techniques to use for testing.
It's cheap to implement, and it produces lots of results.
And it's kind of fun.
So if you can do that, add that to
your...when you're testing for security issues,
I think you'll get a real return on that.
And then finally, these new security
options, definitely use them.
We're using them.
We're going to make more, and we're going to use more.
So I hope you enjoyed that.
Craig Keithley is going to help us out with the Q&A.
And we have some references here.
Again, if you or a friend or an enemy knows about or
believes they know about a potential vulnerability
or security issue in a Apple product, please
report that to Apple Product Security.
Use a bug report, or e-mail product-security@apple.com.
The Secure Coding Guide and the Code Signing
Guides are available for you for your reference.